README.md, before:

# reMarkable Tools
Tools for working with the [reMarkable](https://remarkable.com/) notes format.

## Parser
The parser supports the v3 format for reMarkable notes.

## RM Lines Format
The `rm` format is the proprietary format used by the
[reMarkable](https://remarkable.com/) tablet. The format is used to store
drawings made on the tablet.

In *version 5*, each `.rm` file contains one page.
Each page consists of several layers which contain the *strokes* that make up
the image.

The file consists of a simple header followed by the data.
The data is structured into layers, strokes and dots.

All numeric values are **little endian**.

### Header
The header length is `43` bytes and contains ASCII encoded text:

    reMarkable .lines file, version=5

The remaining bytes are filled with whitespace.

### Layer
The header is immediately followed by `4 bytes` for a 32 bit unsigned integer
which gives us the number of layers.

The next `4 bytes` are again a 32 bit unsigned integer for the number of
*strokes* in the first layer.

### Stroke
Each stroke consists of the stroke data followed by the data for the dots.
A stroke has the following attributes:

| Size      | Datatype  | Description         |
|-----------|-----------|---------------------|
| `4 bytes` | `uint32`  | Brush Type          |
| `4 bytes` | `uint32`  | Color               |
| `4 bytes` | `uint32`  | Padding?            |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Brush Size          |
| `4 bytes` | -         | *unknown* (v5 only) |
| `4 bytes` | `uint32`  | Number of Dots      |

The data for the individual dots follows immediately after.

The **Brush Types** refer to the different "pencil" choices available on the
tablet. The values are different for the v3 and the v5 format.

| Version | Brush             | ID |
|---------|-------------------|----|
| v3      | Paint Brush       | 0  |
| v3      | Pencil            | 1  |
| v3      | Ballpoint         | 2  |
| v3      | Marker            | 3  |
| v3      | Fineliner         | 4  |
| v3      | Highlighter       | 5  |
| v3      | Eraser            | 6  |
| v3      | Mechanical Pencil | 7  |
| v3      | Eraser            | 8  |
|         |                   |    |
| v5      | Brush             | 12 |
| v5      | Mechanical Pencil | 13 |
| v5      | Pencil            | 14 |
| v5      | Ballpoint         | 15 |
| v5      | Marker            | 16 |
| v5      | Fineliner         | 17 |
| v5      | Highlighter       | 18 |

The **Color** is either *Black* (`0`), *Gray* (`1`) or *White* (`2`).

The **Brush Size** is the selected base size of the brush
(not to be confused with the effective width of the stroke).
Predefined sizes are *Small* (`1.875`), *Medium* (`2.0`) and *Large* (`2.125`).

### Dot
Each dot holds the following attributes:

| Size      | Datatype  | Description    |
|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | X-Coordinate   |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Y-Coordinate   |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Speed          |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Tilt           |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Width          |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Pressure       |

After the last byte of the dot data is read,
The data for the next layer begins, starting with the number of strokes.

The **Coordinates** range between `0,0` and `1404,1872`,
the origin is at the top left corner.

**Speed** is a measure for how fast the stylus is drawn across the surface.
Not sure how this would affect something (maybe the density of the stroke?).

The **Pressure** values ranges from `0.0` to `1.0`.

The **Width** seems to be the effective width of the brush,
already accounted for tilt and pressure.

> Not quite sure if this is correct.
> Depending on the Brush type and size, pressure and tilt should determine
> the actual width of the stroke.

The **Tilt** value is the angle of the stylus towards the tablet surface.
It is given in radians and ranges in two intervals
from `0.0` to `1.5708` (0 to 90 degrees)
and from `4.7124` to `6.2832` (270 to 360 degrees).

## API
The `api` package contains an implementation for the reMarkable cloud API,
including a client for websocket notifications.

If the tablet is connected to the API, one can access folders and documents
through that API and also upload or modify content.
Changes made through the API will by synced to the tablet.

---

Sources:

- https://plasma.ninja/blog/devices/remarkable/binary/format/2017/12/26/reMarkable-lines-file-format.html
- https://github.com/juruen/rmapi/
- https://www.reddit.com/r/RemarkableTablet/comments/7c5fh0/work_in_progress_format_of_the_lines_files/
- https://github.com/splitbrain/ReMarkableAPI/wiki

Commit message:

Add README section for rendering

README.md, after:

# reMarkable Tools
Tools for working with the [reMarkable](https://remarkable.com/) notes format.

## Parser
The parser supports the v3 format for reMarkable notes.

## RM Lines Format
The `rm` format is the proprietary format used by the
[reMarkable](https://remarkable.com/) tablet. The format is used to store
drawings made on the tablet.

In *version 5*, each `.rm` file contains one page.
Each page consists of several layers which contain the *strokes* that make up
the image.

The file consists of a simple header followed by the data.
The data is structured into layers, strokes and dots.

All numeric values are **little endian**.

### Header
The header length is `43` bytes and contains ASCII encoded text:

    reMarkable .lines file, version=5

The remaining bytes are filled with whitespace.

### Layer
The header is immediately followed by `4 bytes` for a 32 bit unsigned integer
which gives us the number of layers.

The next `4 bytes` are again a 32 bit unsigned integer for the number of
*strokes* in the first layer.

### Stroke
Each stroke consists of the stroke data followed by the data for the dots.
A stroke has the following attributes:

| Size      | Datatype  | Description         |
|-----------|-----------|---------------------|
| `4 bytes` | `uint32`  | Brush Type          |
| `4 bytes` | `uint32`  | Color               |
| `4 bytes` | `uint32`  | Padding?            |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Brush Size          |
| `4 bytes` | -         | *unknown* (v5 only) |
| `4 bytes` | `uint32`  | Number of Dots      |

The data for the individual dots follows immediately after.

The **Brush Types** refer to the different "pencil" choices available on the
tablet. The values are different for the v3 and the v5 format.

| Version | Brush             | ID |
|---------|-------------------|----|
| v3      | Paint Brush       | 0  |
| v3      | Pencil            | 1  |
| v3      | Ballpoint         | 2  |
| v3      | Marker            | 3  |
| v3      | Fineliner         | 4  |
| v3      | Highlighter       | 5  |
| v3      | Eraser            | 6  |
| v3      | Mechanical Pencil | 7  |
| v3      | Eraser            | 8  |
|         |                   |    |
| v5      | Brush             | 12 |
| v5      | Mechanical Pencil | 13 |
| v5      | Pencil            | 14 |
| v5      | Ballpoint         | 15 |
| v5      | Marker            | 16 |
| v5      | Fineliner         | 17 |
| v5      | Highlighter       | 18 |

The **Color** is either *Black* (`0`), *Gray* (`1`) or *White* (`2`).

The **Brush Size** is the selected base size of the brush
(not to be confused with the effective width of the stroke).
Predefined sizes are *Small* (`1.875`), *Medium* (`2.0`) and *Large* (`2.125`).

### Dot
Each dot holds the following attributes:

| Size      | Datatype  | Description    |
|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | X-Coordinate   |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Y-Coordinate   |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Speed          |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Tilt           |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Width          |
| `4 bytes` | `float32` | Pressure       |

After the last byte of the dot data is read,
The data for the next layer begins, starting with the number of strokes.

The **Coordinates** range between `0,0` and `1404,1872`,
the origin is at the top left corner.

**Speed** is a measure for how fast the stylus is drawn across the surface.
Not sure how this would affect something (maybe the density of the stroke?).

The **Pressure** values ranges from `0.0` to `1.0`.

The **Width** seems to be the effective width of the brush,
already accounted for tilt and pressure.

> Not quite sure if this is correct.
> Depending on the Brush type and size, pressure and tilt should determine
> the actual width of the stroke.

The **Tilt** value is the angle of the stylus towards the tablet surface.
It is given in radians and ranges in two intervals
from `0.0` to `1.5708` (0 to 90 degrees)
and from `4.7124` to `6.2832` (270 to 360 degrees).

## Render
The `render` package contains methods to render drawings to a bitmap (PNG)
or PDF.

### Status
This "basically works" but the rendering output does not quite match the
original.

- Some lines are way to thin/weak, others to strong.
- When Rendering a drawing as an overlay on an existing PDF,
  the scale and placement of the drawing is off.

## API
The `api` package contains an implementation for the reMarkable cloud API,
including a client for websocket notifications.

If the tablet is connected to the API, one can access folders and documents
through that API and also upload or modify content.
Changes made through the API will by synced to the tablet.

---

Sources:

- https://plasma.ninja/blog/devices/remarkable/binary/format/2017/12/26/reMarkable-lines-file-format.html
- https://github.com/juruen/rmapi/
- https://www.reddit.com/r/RemarkableTablet/comments/7c5fh0/work_in_progress_format_of_the_lines_files/
- https://github.com/splitbrain/ReMarkableAPI/wiki
